=Project 1 Retrospective=
=====Author: Jacob Smith=====
=====UIN: 627002616=====

==Introduction==
::This first project has been a great learning experience for php, html, CSS and JavaScript, diving headfirst into the syntax and functionality of each component language and when to use them in the process of creating a personal website. In addition to learning the languages themselves, this project has also been a great experience in learning new programming practices when it comes to web development. Furthermore, this project presented a great opportunity to construct a professional student web site to demonstrate my recently acquired skills in when it comes to basic web development. 

==New skills I learned==
::There were a great many new skills that I needed to learn in order to tackle this project, the main of which being learning the programming languages. Among the major languages—html, php, JavaScript, and CSS—the easiest by far was php, in part due to its similarity with programming languages that I am familiar with such as C++. The other three proved to be more challenging because of unfamiliarity on my part but through diligent effort I was able to establish at least a basic understanding of each and how to use them in the web development process.

::One of these languages is php. This programming language provides the traditional programming functionality expected in languages such as C++ while also allowing for interaction between the code itself and the stylized output that is displayed to the user. This proved to be an invaluable asset when completing this project as it allowed for complex functions and conditional statements which would be difficult to implement otherwise with only html and CSS. Additionally, I learned that combining it with html and CSS was made easy by the fact that most commands of the aforementioned languages can be output as a string by a php echo command, making for a relatively simple method to stylize basic php output. 

::Another language I learned the basics of was CSS, which allowed for in depth styling and positioning of text and other objects in the web site displayed to the user I learned that CSS hosts a wealth of commands and expressions that are useful for creating animations, displaying backgrounds, aligning text, adjusting font, creating margins, among others. Of course, I was not able to try out all of the commands CSS has to offer but I was able to implement some of the basic ones in order to format my web site to be more than just a wall of text. 

==Major challenges==
::My first major challenge arose in the area of debugging. I used InfinityFree to host my website and found it to be a convenient and easy to use service for organizing my files and displaying the website itself, however, I ran into issues when trying to debug issues that came up in the code. At first, since I did not know you could turn on error messages when the site crashed, I was working under the model of debugging by rereading the code where I think the bug may have occurred, which proved to be tedious and time consuming but did in the end reveal where errors took place. After, I found that error messages could be turned on, this issue became less pressing, however, the debugging process was still a challenging endeavor despite this in some occasions. 

::Another major challenge was new syntax and expressions. Previous coding experience has taught me what needs to happen in a program in order to accomplish a task, but when learning a new programming language, it can often be difficult to know how to go about doing that. There were many instances where I knew what I wanted to do at a certain point of the program but I didn’t know how to do them in the language. This issue was particularly prevalent when using CSS and html to try and format and stylize the information being displayed on the website, as I had little knowledge beforehand on how to write expressions that would, for example, change the font, positioning or size of the text on a given page of the site. After a good bit of studying the material however, I was able to overcome this issue and establish a working understanding when using CSS and html with php. 

::The third main issue that I ran up against occurred when working on the image display mechanics. I had no prior experience working with a raw image file and converting it to a viewable document, which manifested in several hours pouring through the GD and image functions for php in order to find the right functions to properly display the right image at the right size. I eventually found the imagecreatefromjpeg() and imagejpeg() functions that, when combined, could generate an image identifier suitable for output to the user. 

::The fourth major issue I encountered occurred in the search function. The initial part to take in a keyword from the user and then search all pages in the web site to find a match was relatively simple, however, I ran into issues when trying to figure out how to then highlight segments on a separate page. And though it was challenging at first, I was able to understand how to implement it by the projects end. 

==Assessment==
::I learned a great deal of valuable skills that can be applied to web development in the future and I would overall consider this to be a productive experience even if it was a bit tedious and difficult at times. The part of the project I found most enjoyable was probably the gallery segment because it featured heavy usage of php, which I enjoy using due to its similarity to C++, and because I found processing and displaying an image/group of images in different formats to be interesting, albeit more difficult than the previous wikitext and csv segments. I least enjoyed the wikitext part of the project because, while I understood the value of having an automatic text formatter, it felt boring to write and a bit of a waste as some of the functions weren’t very useful or even necessary for what I planned to include on the website. Again, I recognize its importance, however, I ended up enjoying programming the other segments of the project more than this one in particular. 

==Conclusion==
::This project saw myself and the other students learn about basic web development languages that can be used to create professional or personal websites with a great deal of functionality and features. I will say that, if I were to do the project again, I would take a different approach to the wikitext processor. As it stands now, the processor operates on a line by line basis which doesn’t allow for more complex combinations of the wikitext functions. I would have liked to rather read in the whole text file as one string and then find and replace wikitext syntax with the proper html tags to format it correctly. This approach would have made things like quote blocks and lists—which often span multiple lines—much easier to handle than the line by line approach. And in regards to the lectures, I would have preferred a more hands on approach when teaching php, CSS, etc., instead of just giving us resources to examine on our own and having us learn while working on the project. 

==Resources==
The following resources were used over the course of this project: